Actors


Traditional objects store their state as data and we call their methods
Actors store the data but the way we interact with them asynchronously

Every interaction happens through sending messages asynchronously

Messages are asynchronously passed
since real life physical messages take time too
think of it like sending a text rather than poking you friends brain


How Akka Actually works


So how does this whole actor magic actually work and that is the subject of this video.
OK so long story short an actor system actually has a thread pool that it shares with actors.

A thread is active in that it can run code and an actor has some things attached to it.
It has a message handler that thing which we define in the receive method in our actor classes.
It has a message queue that akka uses to store the messages that we send to this actor.
So whenever we send a message it's in queued in this mailbox.
So an actor is just a data structure.
It's passive.It actually needs a thread to run. So the way akka does it is by spawning a number of threads.
A small number in the dozens or maybe in the hundreds and these threads can handle a huge amount of
actors in the millions per gigabytes of heap.

And the way that Akka manages to do that is by scheduling actors for execution on these small number
of threads and the mechanism goes like this.

Sending a message - This is just queueing into the mailbox
This is thread safe and it's being done by Akka behind the scenes so you don't need to concern yourself
with that.

Processing a message
This is more interesting because as we mentioned before an actor is just a data
structure. It needs a thread to actually execute any code so needs to schedule one to execute the actor.
So at some point a thread will take control of this actor and it will start queuing messages from the
actor's mailbox and for every one of those messages it will invoke the message handler.
As a result the actor might change his state or send messages to other actors.
After that the message is simply discarded.
This whole process happens a bunch of times.
Now at some point the Akka thread scheduler decides to unscheduled this actor for execution.
At which point the thread releases control of this actor and it will move on to do something else.
So this whole process offers us some guarantees.

First of all only one thread may operate on an actor at any one time which makes actors effectively
single threaded.

That also means that we don't need to do any synchronization over the actors state because only one
thread has access to the actor's internal state at any time.
Additionally the thread may never release the actor in the middle of processing messages suppressing
messages is atomic.

Message delivery gauarantee
Now akka also offers some message delivery guarantees because the message delivery environment is inherently
unreliable.
So Akka offers at most once deliver a guarantee meaning that the receiving actor receives at most
once the message that I want to send it it will never receive duplicates.
Also for any sender receiver pair the message order is kept.

What this means is that if I have two actors Alice and Bob and Alice sends Bob two messages a and then
B the most once delivery guarantee means that Bob will never receive any duplicates of either the messages
A or B and the second delivery guarantee is that Bob will always receive the message A before message B.

But if Bob also receives messages from other actors those might be intermingled between in B but the
order A then B is always guaranteed.


Intro
ActorCapabilities
ActorBehaviour
ChildActors
ChildActorsExercise
ActorLogging


